+++
date = '2025-01-26T19:54:31+11:00'
draft = false
title = 'Introduction To Jazz Atlas'
+++
## Thesis

I am noticing a vibe shift. As we near the precipice of an AI-enabled productivity explosion, those in technology are re-discovering the value in the beautiful and the cool.

There is a broad movement in technology towards health and aesthetics. Technology adjacent publications like the Palladium Magazine host quarterly launch parties in which participants dress well. The Technology Brothers podcast features John Coogan and Jordi Hays dressed in suits and topics of discussion involve nice watches and why using the word "retarded" ironically is classless. The bed frame discourse and the trope of the technology brother living in complete degeneracy while he puts his craft above all else is falling out of style. Whether it's Jeff Bezos and his body transformation or Patrick Collison and his reading list, leaders in technology are helping shape what is cool, and people are yearning to be different. 

One other thing I have noticed is an uptick in the frequency of people in technology, non-musicians, attending live jazz concerts. People tend to post online when they do this. This is because it's a cool thing to do, however I would recommend that people only go to *good* live jazz concerts. This sounds obvious but I'll explain why the "good" in good live jazz is important.

Ever since Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie invented "Bebop" in the 1940s, jazz music in its most cutting-edge form has been an intellectual pursuit by both the artist and the listener. While I would argue that this has made for some of the greatest music and feats of artistry ever created like Miles Davis's "Kind of Blue" and John Coltrane's "A Love Supreme", it has also made it mostly inaccessible to non-musicians since the dance band era of the 1930s.

For most non-musicians, jazz is functional music. Restaurants might play it in the background while you eat at a table with a warm, dimly-lit lamp in the middle. Sometimes restaurants employ humans to perform such background music. The term "elevator" music also comes to mind. The tune "Girl from Ipanema" is a staple of these functions and many famous records like "Getz and Gilberto" have thus been subject to the depths of restaurant Spotify playlists across the western world.

So why go out and listen to good jazz? We hear "Kind of Blue" and "Getz and Gilberto", some of the greatest records of all time, in restaurants and elevators all the time. We listen to good jazz because it's an intellectual pursuit. It's cool. It's extremely hard to execute and humans appreciate craft. At its best, you are blessed with a group of musicians who for most of their lives have been perfecting their craft and their sound. Most of all, you are hearing improvisation, and in that improvisation you are hearing who they have listened to, hundreds of years of western music theory, and the physical make up of their bodies. For example, a saxophonist's sound is shaped not only by how they put air in the horn, but the entire makeup of their oral cavity. This means that each sound is unique to that person.

Jazz music at its worst is truly some of the worst music, akin to noise. The problem is because non-musicians see jazz as a cool, intellectual pursuit, they will google "Jazz Bars near me" and go listen to a few old guys playing American Songbook tunes for $50 each over a sea of voices and the clattering of glasses. Once tuned in, they are able to hear tunes like "Autumn Leaves" and "Blue Bossa" be absolutely murdered. Even to a non-musician this sounds bad, and the experience as a whole is likely to be remembered as a cool thing they don't need to experience again.

I don't blame non-musicians for not knowing that an underground place called "Spirithaus Gallery" in an Oakland industrial district is the place to be on Thursdays at 11pm-4am and features guest appearances by Grammy award winners like Thomas Pridgen and Ambrose Akimusire and instead opting for the "Jazz Bar" in Union Square San Francisco. The unfortunate reality is that while they are being serenaded by the worst rendition of "Girl from Ipanema" to grace the earth, Ambrose is blowing in-group minds with tunes from his latest Album on the Blue Note Record label. As a proponent of this music, I want as many clever people to hear Ambrose play as possible.

What is my authority here? I am an engineer and I run a startup, but I am a far better jazz musician than any of those things. I play most days but early on in my career I realised that a career as a performing musician is made up of soulless background gigs and elevator music with one-off concerts and tours that we practice for in-between. It's not a life that I wanted to live and it's not the music I wanted to play all the time. I do however, respect the hell out of those that have rolled with the punches I mentioned, and have become true masters of their craft in the process. The point of this blog is to help you go out and hear them play, and each week I will put together recommended concert lists for those in San Francisco and New York City. To accompany this I will also include recommended listening to help prime one's ears.

The technology mono-culture can be broken. There is an appetite for that to happen right now as those on the frontier theorise what a beautiful world might look like in an age of AI. I have a unique insight into both the technology and jazz world, and see an opportunity to facilitate the interweaving of the two, especially while there is an appetite. A vibe shift.
